Article 8 – Laws inconsistent with Fundamental Rights
(1) Any law, or any custom or usage having the force of law, in so far as it is inconsistent with the rights conferred by this Chapter, shall, to the extent of such inconsistency, be void. 
(2) The State shall not make any law which takes away or abridges the rights so conferred and any law made in contravention of this clause shall, to the extent of such contravention, be void.
(3) The Provisions of this Article shall not apply to__ 
    (a) any law relating to members of the Armed Forces, or of the police or of such other forces as are charged with the maintenance of public order, for the purpose of ensuring the proper discharge of their duties or the maintenance of discipline among them; or 
    (b) any of the__ 
        (i) laws specified in the First Schedule as in force immediately before the commencing day or as amended by any of the laws specified in that Schedule; 
        (ii) other laws specified in Part I of the First Schedule;
    and no such law nor any provision thereof shall be void on the ground that such law or provision is inconsistent with, or repugnant to, any provision of this Chapter. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in paragraph (b) of clause (3), within a period of two 
    years from the commencing day, the appropriate Legislature shall bring the laws specified in 1[Part II 
    of the First Schedule] into conformity with the rights conferred by this Chapter : 
    Provided that the appropriate Legislature may by resolution extend the said period of two years by a period not exceeding six months. 
    Explanation.__ If in respect of any law [Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament)] is the appropriate Legislature, such resolution shall be a resolution of the National Assembly. 
(5) The rights conferred by this Chapter shall not be suspended except as expressly provided by the Constitution.

Article 9 – Security of Person
No person shall be deprived of life or liberty save in accordance with law.
9A. Clean and healthy environment.__ Every person shall be entitled to a clean, healthy and sustainable environment.

Article 10 – Safeguards as to Arrest and Detention
(1) No person who is arrested shall be detained in custody without being informed, as soon as may be, of the grounds for such arrest, nor shall he be 
denied the right to consult and be defended by a legal practitioner of his choice. 
(2) Every person who is arrested and detained in custody shall be produced before a magistrate within a period of twenty-four hours of such arrest, excluding the time necessary for the journey from 
the place of arrest to the court of the nearest magistrate, and no such person shall be detained in custody beyond the said period without the authority of a magistrate. 
(3) Nothing in clauses (1) and (2) shall apply to any person who is arrested or detained under any law providing for preventive detention. 
(4) No law providing for preventive detention shall be made except to deal with persons acting in a manner prejudicial to the integrity, security or defence of Pakistan or any part thereof, or external 
affairs of Pakistan, or public order, or the maintenance of supplies or services, and no such law shall 
authorise the detention of a person for a period exceeding [three months] unless the appropriate 
Review Board has, after affording him an opportunity of being heard in person, reviewed his case and 
reported, before the expiration of the said period, that there is, in its opinion, sufficient cause for such 
detention, and, if the detention is continued after the said period of [three months], unless the 
appropriate Review Board has reviewed his case and reported, before the expiration of each period of 
three months, that there is, in its opinion, sufficient cause for such detention. 
(5) When any person is detained in pursuance of an order made under any law providing for 
preventive detention, the authority making the order shall, 3[within fifteen days] from such detention, 
communicate to such person the grounds on which the order has been made, and shall afford him the 
earliest opportunity of making a representation against the order: 
Provided that the authority making any such order may refuse to disclose facts which such 
authority considers it to be against the public interest to disclose. 
(6) The authority making the order shall furnish to the appropriate Review Board all documents 
relevant to the case unless a certificate, signed by a Secretary to the Government concerned, to the 
effect that it is not in the public interest to furnish any documents, is produced. 
(7) Within a period of twenty-four months commencing on the day of his first detention in 
pursuance of an order made under a law providing for preventive detention, no person shall be detained 
in pursuance of any such order for more than a total period of eight months in the case of a person 
detained for acting in a manner prejudicial to public order and twelve months in any other case: 
Provided that this clause shall not apply to any person who is employed by, or works for, or 
acts on instructions received from, the enemy 1[, or who is acting or attempting to act in a manner 
prejudicial to the integrity, security or defence of Pakistan or any part thereof or who commits or 
attempts to commit any act which amounts to an anti-national activity as defined in a Federal law or 
is a member of any association which has for its objects, or which indulges in, any such anti-national 
activity.]. 
(8) The appropriate Review Board shall determine the place of detention of the person detained and fix a reasonable subsistence allowance for his family. 
(9) Nothing in this Article shall apply to any person who for the time being is an enemy alien.

Article 10A –  Right to fair trial
For the determination of his civil rights and obligations or in any criminal charge against him a person shall be entitled to a fair trial and due process.

Article 14 — Inviolability of dignity of man; privacy of home
(1) The dignity of man and, subject to law, the privacy of home, shall be inviolable. 
(2) No person shall be subjected to torture for the purpose of extracting evidence. 

Article 15 – Freedom of Movement
Every citizen shall have the right to remain in, and, subject to any reasonable restriction imposed by law in the public interest, enter and move freely throughout 
Pakistan and to reside and settle in any part thereof. 

Article 16 – Freedom of Assembly
Every citizen shall have the right to assemble peacefully and without arms, subject to any reasonable restrictions imposed by law in the interest of public order. 

Article 17 – Freedom of Association
(1)   Every citizen shall have the right to form associations or unions, subject to any reasonable restrictions imposed by law in the interest of sovereignty or integrity 
of Pakistan, public order or morality. 
(2) Every citizen, not being in the service of Pakistan, shall have the right to form or be a 
member of a political party, subject to any reasonable restrictions imposed by law in the interest of the 
sovereignty or integrity of Pakistan and such law shall provide that where the Federal Government 
declares that any political party has been formed or is operating in a manner prejudicial to the 
sovereignty or integrity of Pakistan, the Federal Government shall, within fifteen days of such 
declaration, refer the matter to the [Federal Constitutional Court of Pakistan] whose decision on such 
reference shall be final. 
(3) Every political party shall account for the source of its funds in accordance with law.

Article 18 – Freedom of Trade and Business
Subject to such qualifications, if any, as may be prescribed by law, every citizen shall have the right to enter upon any lawful profession or occupation, and to conduct any lawful trade or business: 
Provided that nothing in this Article shall prevent__ 
  (a) the regulation of any trade or profession by a licensing system; or 
  (b) the regulation of trade, commerce or industry in the interest of free competition therein; or 
  (c) the carrying on, by the Federal Government or a Provincial Government, or by a corporation controlled by any such Government, of any trade, business, industry or service, to the exclusion, complete or partial, of other persons.

Article 19 – Freedom of Speech
Every citizen shall have the right to freedom of speech and expression, and there shall be freedom of the press, subject to any reasonable restrictions imposed by 
law in the interest of the glory of Islam or the integrity, security or defence of Pakistan or any part thereof, friendly relations with foreign States, public order, decency or morality, or in relation to contempt of court, [commission of] or incitement to an offence.

Article 19A – Right to Information
Every citizen shall have the right to have access to information in all matters of public importance subject to regulation and reasonable restrictions imposed by law.

Article 20–28 — Equality, nondiscrimination, religious freedom
All citizens are equal before the law and entitled to equal protection of law.
Equality of opportunity in public employment.
Freedom to profess religion.
Safeguards against discrimination.

Article 25 — Equality of citizens
All citizens are equal before the law and entitled to equal protection of law. No citizen shall be discriminated against on the basis of race, religion, caste, sex, residence or place of birth.