Article 141 – Extent of Federal and Provincial Laws
Parliament may make laws for the whole or any part of Pakistan.
A Provincial Assembly may make laws for the Province.

Article 142 – Subject-matter of Federal and Provincial Laws
Subject to the Constitution__ 
(a) [Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament)] shall have exclusive power to make laws with respect to any matter in the Federal Legislative List.
(b) Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament) and a Provincial Assembly shall have power to make laws with respect to criminal law, criminal procedure and evidence.
(c) a Provincial Assembly shall, and Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament) shall not, have power to make laws with respect to any matter not enumerated in the Federal Legislative List.
(d) Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament) shall have exclusive power to make laws with respect to all matters pertaining to such areas in the Federation as are not included in any Province.

Article 143 – Inconsistency between Federal and Provincial Laws
If any provision of an Act of a Provincial Assembly is repugnant to any provision of an Act of Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament) which Majlis-e- Shoora (Parliament) is competent to enact, then the Act of Majlis-e- Shoora (Parliament), 
whether passed before or after the Act of the Provincial Assembly, shall prevail and the Act of the Provincial Assembly shall, to the extent of the repugnancy, be void.

Article 144 – Power of Parliament to Legislate for Provinces
If [one] or more Provincial Assemblies pass resolutions to the effect that Parliament may by law regulate any matter not enumerated in [the Federal Legislation List] in the Fourth Schedule, it shall be lawful for 2[Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament)] to pass an Act for 
regulating that matter accordingly, but any Act so passed may, as respects any Province to which it applies, be amended or repealed by Act of the Assembly of that Province.

Article 149 – Directions to Provinces in certain cases
(1) The executive authority of every Province shall be so exercised as not to impede or prejudice the exercise of the executive authority of the 
Federation, and the executive authority of the Federation shall extend to the giving of such directions to a Province as may appear to the Federal Government to be necessary for that purpose. 
(2) The executive authority of the Federation shall also extend to the giving of directions to a Province as to the construction and maintenance of means of communication declared in the direction 
to be of national or strategic importance. 
(3) The executive authority of the Federation shall also extend to the giving of directions to a Province as to the manner in which the executive authority thereof is to be exercised for the purpose 
of preventing any grave menace to the peace or tranquility or economic life of Pakistan or any part thereof.