FOURTH SCHEDULE - Legislative Lists
Part I
1. The defence of the Federation or any part thereof in peace or war; the military, naval and air 
forces of the Federation and any other armed forces raised or maintained by the Federation ; any armed 
forces which are not forces of the Federation but are attached to or operating with any of the Armed 
Forces of the Federation including civil armed forces; Federal Intelligence Bureau; preventive 
detention for reasons of State connected with defence, external affairs, or the security of Pakistan or 
any part thereof ; persons subjected to such detention; industries declared by Federal law to be 
necessary for the purpose of defence or for the prosecution of war. 
2. Military, naval and air force works; local self-government in cantonment areas, [local taxes, fees, cess, charges, tolls in such areas,] the constitution and powers within such areas of cantonment 
authorities, the regulation of house accommodation in such areas, and the delimitation of such areas. 
3. External affairs; the implementing of treaties and agreements, including educational and 
cultural pacts and agreements, with other countries; extradition, including the surrender of criminals 
and accused persons to Governments outside Pakistan. 
4. Nationality, citizenship and naturalisation. 
5. Migration from or into, or settlement in, a Province or the Federal Capital. 
6. Currency, coinage and legal tender. 
7. Admission into, and emigration and expulsion from, Pakistan, including in relation thereto the regulation of the movements in Pakistan of persons not domiciled in Pakistan; pilgrimages to places beyond Pakistan. 
8. Posts and telegraphs, including telephones, wireless, broadcasting and other like forms of communications; Post Office Saving Bank. 
9. Foreign exchange; cheques, bills of exchange, promissory notes and other like instruments. 
10. Public debt of the Federation, including the borrowing of money on the security of the Federal Consolidated Fund ; foreign loans and foreign aid. 
11.Federal Public Services and Federal Public Service Commission. 
12. Federal pensions, that is to say, pensions payable by the Federation or out of the Federal Consolidated Fund. 
13. Federal Ombudsman.
14. Administrative Courts and Tribunals for Federal subjects. 
15. Libraries, museums, and similar institutions controlled or financed by the Federation. 
16. Federal agencies and institutes for the following purposes, that is to say, for research, for professional or technical training, or for the promotion of special studies. 
17. Education as respects Pakistani students in foreign countries and foreign students in Pakistan. 
18. Nuclear energy 
19. Port quarantine, seamen’s and marine hospitals and hospitals connected with port quarantine. 
20. Maritime shipping and navigation, including shipping and navigation on tidal waters; Admiralty jurisdiction. 
21. Aircraft and air navigation; the provision of aerodromes; regulation and organisation of air traffic and of aerodromes. 
22. Lighthouses, including lightships, beacons and other provisions for the safety of shipping and aircraft. 
23. Import and export across customs frontiers as defined by the Federal Government, inter provincial trade and commerce, trade and commerce with foreign countries; standard of quality of goods to be exported out of Pakistan.
24. State Bank of Pakistan; banking, that is to say, the conduct of banking business by corporations other than corporations owned or controlled by a Province and carrying on business only within that Province. 
25. Stock exchanges and futures markets with objects and business not confined to one Province.
26. Stock exchanges and futures markets with objects and business not confined to one Province.
27. Taxes on corporations. 
28. Taxes on the sales and purchases of goods imported, exported, produced, manufactured or consumed
29. Taxes on mineral oil, natural gas and minerals for use in generation of nuclear energy. 
30. Taxes and duties on the production capacity of any plant, machinery, undertaking, establishment or installation in lieu of the taxes and duties specified in entries 44, 47, 48 and 49 or in lieu of any one or more of them. 
31. Terminal taxes on goods or passengers carried by railway, sea or air; taxes on their fares and freights. 
32. Fees in respect of any of the matters in this Part, but not including fees taken in any court. 
33. Jurisdiction and powers of all courts, except the [Federal Constitutional Court and the Supreme Court], with respect to any of the matters in this List and, to such extent as is expressly 
authorised by or under the Constitution, the enlargement of the jurisdiction of the [Federal Constitutional Court and the Supreme Court], and the conferring thereon of supplemental powers. 
34. Offences against laws with respect to any of the matters in this Part. 
35. Inquiries and statistics for the purposes of any of the matters in this Part. 
36. Matters which under the Constitution are within the legislative competence of [Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament)] or relate to the Federation. 
37. Matters incidental or ancillary to any matter enumerate in this Part.

PART II
1. Railways.
2. Mineral oil and natural gas; liquids and substances declared by Federal law to be dangerously inflammable. 
3. Development of industries, where development under Federal control is declared by Federal law to be expedient in the public interest; institutions, establishments, bodies and corporations 
administered or managed by the Federal Government immediately before the Commencing day, including the 1[Pakistan Water and Power Development Authority and the Pakistan Industrial 
Development Corporation]; all undertakings, projects and schemes of such institutions, establishments, bodies and corporations, industries, projects and undertakings owned wholly or partially by the Federation or by a corporation set up by the Federation.
4. Electricity. 
5. Major ports, that is to say, the declaration and delimitation of such ports, and the constitution and powers of port authorities therein. 
6. All regulatory authorities established under a Federal law. 
7. National planning and national economic coordination including planning and coordination of scientific and technological research. 
8. Supervision and management of public debt. 
9. Census. 
10. Extension of the powers and jurisdiction of members of a police force belonging to any Province to any area in another Province, but not so as to enable the police of one Province to 
exercise powers and jurisdiction in another province without the consent of the Government of that Province; extension of the powers and jurisdiction of members of a police force belonging 
to any Province to railway areas outside that Province. 
11. Legal, medical and other professions. 
12. Standards in institutions for higher education and research, scientific and technical institutions. 
13. Inter-provincial matters and co-ordination. 
14. Council of Common Interests. 
15. Offences against laws with respect to any of the matters in this Part. 
16. Fees in respect of any of the matters in this Part but not including fees taken in any court. 
17. Inquiries and statistics for the purposes of any of the matters in this Part. 
18. Matters incidental or ancillary to any matter enumerated in this Part. 